chore: esm typescript example (#8173)
dotansimha/graphql-code-generator: website/src/pages/docs/getting-started/esm-typescript-usage.mdx

---
title: ESM TypeScript Usage
---

# ESM TypeScript Usage

ESM is an important step in the JavaScript ecosystem because it allows static analysis of the depency tree.

> For bundlers such as Webpack this is a huge as it allows the complied bundle to only contain code that is required at runtime, which means smaller download size when loading code over the network.

Author: ```suggestion
For bundlers such as Webpack, this is huge as it allows the compiled bundle only to contain code that is required at runtime, which means a smaller download size when loading code over the network.
```

> Forr bundlers such as Webpack this is a huge as it allows the complied bundle to only contain code that is required at runtime, which means smaller download size when loading code over the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For bundlers such as Webpack this is a huge as it allows the complied bundle to only contain code that is required at runtime, which means smaller download size when loading code over the network.
```

> Forr bundlers such as Webpack this is a huge as it allows the complied bundle to only contain code that is required at runtime, which means smaller download size when loading code over the network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For bundlers such as Webpack, this is huge as it allows the compiled bundle only to contain code that is required at runtime, which means a smaller download size when loading code over the network.
```

Author: resolve as i accidentally first committed @saihaj comment, that missed a typo and had to apply it manually

While ESM is a huge benefit for the whole JavaScript community, the adoption is not straight-foward.

**Note:** ESM adoption in the JavaScript ecosystem is still in progress, if you choose to use ESM in your application (especially Node.js), you might hit a lot of pitfalls and incompatibility issues within libraries.

> If you are not interested in ESM you can easily skip this documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are not interested in ESM you can easily skip this documentation.
```

This is not necessary since the page's title is "ESM TypeScript Usage"

Author: okay I kind of assumed that people will go through each item in getting started

Let's show you how to use ESM with TypeScript.

> If you are impatient, you can find [a full runnable and ready to use example in the GraphQL Code Generator reporsitory](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-code-generator/tree/master/examples/typescript-esm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are impatient, [checkout this example](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-code-generator/tree/master/examples/typescript-esm).
```

For these examples the correct ESM counterpart is `./foo.js` and `../something/from/here.js`.

In order to instruct GraphQL Code Generator to generatse such imports whenever a named import is generated you need to set the `emitLegacyCommonJSImports` option to `false`.

```yaml filename="codegen.yml" {5}
schema: https://swapi-graphql.netlify.app/.netlify/functions/index
documents:
  - 'src/**/*.ts'
  - '!src/gql/**/*'
emitLegacyCommonJSImports: false
generates:
  ./src/gql/:
    preset: gql-tag-operations-preset
```

## TypeScript Compiler Options

TypeScript introduced a new module resolution algorithm for ESM in version 4.7.
For supporting ESM within your application you need to set `moduleResolution` to `node16` and the (output) `module` type to `node16` (see tsconfig.json).

```ts {4,5}
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "ES2018",
    "moduleResolution": "node16",
    "module": "node16",
    "outDir": "dist"
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*"]
}
```

## Package adjustments

In order to instruct runtimes and tooling to interpret `.js` files as ESM you have to set the `type` property to `module` within the `package.json` of your application.

> Furthemore, you can use the ESM cli version of GraphQL Code Generator by utilizing the command `graphql-codegen-esm` over `graphql-codegen`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthemore, you can use the ESM CLI version of GraphQL Code Generator by utilizing the command `graphql-codegen-esm.
```

This step, however, is fully optional.

```json filename="package.json" {14,18}
{
  "name": "example-typescript-esm",
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "private": true,
  "devDependencies": {
    "@graphql-codegen/cli": "2.11.3",
    "@graphql-codegen/gql-tag-operations-preset": "1.5.2"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "@graphql-typed-document-node/core": "3.1.1",
    "graphql": "16.5.0"
  },
  "scripts": {
    "codegen": "graphql-codegen-esm --config codegen.yml",
    "build": "tsc",
    "start": "node dist/main.js"
  },
  "type": "module"
}
```

## Conclusion

> Supporting ESM and configuring GraphQL Code Generator and your project for ESM requires some worl, but isn't that hard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supporting ESM and configuring GraphQL Code Generator and your project for ESM requires some work, but isn't that hard.
```

> As mentioned before, you can find [a full runnable and ready to use example in the GraphQL Code Generator reporsitory](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-code-generator/tree/master/examples/typescript-esm).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, you can checkout [an example in the GraphQL Code Generator reporsitory](https://github.com/dotansimha/graphql-code-generator/tree/master/examples/typescript-esm).
```
